Download Link: https://assignmentchef.com/product/solved-optimizing-the-performance-of-a-pipelined-processor
<br>
<strong>1 Introduction</strong>In this lab, you will learn about the design and implementation of a pipelined Y86 processor, optimizing bothit and a benchmark program to maximize performance. You are allowed to make any semantics preservingtransformations to the benchmark program, or to make enhancements to the pipelined processor, or both.When you have completed the lab, you will have a keen appreciation for the interactions between code andhardware that affect the performance of your programs.The lab is organized into three parts, each with its own handin. In Part A you will write some simple Y86programs and become familiar with the Y86 tools. In Part B, you will extend the SEQ simulator with twonew instructions. These two parts will prepare you for Part C, the heart of the lab, where you will optimizethe Y86 benchmark program and the processor design.<strong>2 Logistics</strong>You will work on this lab alone.Any clarifications and revisions to the assignment will be posted on the course Web page.3 Handout InstructionsSITE-SPECIFIC: Insert a paragraph here that explains how students should downloadthe archlab-handout.tarfile.1. Start by copying the file archlab-handout.tar to a (protected) directory in which you plan todo your work.

2. Then give the command: tar xvf archlab-handout.tar. This will cause the following filesto be unpacked into the directory: README, Makefile, sim.tar, archlab.ps,archlab.pdf,and simguide.pdf.3. Next, give the command tar xvf sim.tar. This will create the directory sim, which containsyour personal copy of the Y86 tools. You will be doing all of your work inside this directory.4. Finally, change to the sim directory and build the Y86 tools:unix&gt; cd simunix&gt; make clean; make4 Part AYou will be working in directory sim/misc in this part.Your task is to write and simulate the following three Y86 programs. The required behavior of these programsis defined by the example C functions in examples.c. Be sure to put your name and ID in acomment at the beginning of each program. You can test your programs by first assembling them with theprogram YAS and then running them with the instruction set simulator YIS.In all of your Y86 functions, you should follow the IA32 conventions for the structure of the stack frameand for register usage instructions, including saving and restoring any callee-save registers that you use.sum.ys: Iteratively sum linked list elementsWrite a Y86 program sum.ys that iteratively sums the elements of a linked list. Your program shouldconsist of some code that sets up the stack structure, invokes a function, and then halts. In this case, thefunction should be Y86 code for a function (sum list) that is functionally equivalent to the C sum listfunction in Figure 1. Test your program using the following three-element list:# Sample linked list.align 4ele1:.long 0x00a.long ele2ele2:.long 0x0b0.long ele3ele3:.long 0xc00.long 021 /* linked list element */2 typedef struct ELE {3 int val;4 struct ELE *next;5 } *list_ptr;67 /* sum_list – Sum the elements of a linked list */8 int sum_list(list_ptr ls)9 {10 int val = 0;11 while (ls) {12 val += ls-&gt;val;13 ls = ls-&gt;next;14 }15 return val;16 }1718 /* rsum_list – Recursive version of sum_list */19 int rsum_list(list_ptr ls)20 {21 if (!ls)22 return 0;23 else {24 int val = ls-&gt;val;25 int rest = rsum_list(ls-&gt;next);26 return val + rest;27 }28 }2930 /* copy_block – Copy src to dest and return xor checksum of src */31 int copy_block(int *src, int *dest, int len)32 {33 int result = 0;34 while (len &gt; 0) {35 int val = *src++;36 *dest++ = val;37 result ˆ= val;38 len–;39 }40 return result;41 }Figure 1: C versions of the Y86 solution functions. See sim/misc/examples.c3rsum.ys: Recursively sum linked list elementsWrite a Y86 program rsum.ys that recursively sums the elements of a linked list. This code should besimilar to the code in sum.ys, except that it should use a function rsum list that recursively sums alist of numbers, as shown with the C function rsum list in Figure 1. Test your program using the samethree-element list you used for testing list.ys.copy.ys: Copy a source block to a destination blockWrite a program (copy.ys) that copies a block of words from one part of memory to another (nonoverlappingarea) area of memory, computing the checksum (Xor) of all the words copied.Your program should consist of code that sets up a stack frame, invokes a function copy block, andthen halts. The function should be functionally equivalent to the C function copy block shown in FigureFigure 1. Test your program using the following three-element source and destination blocks:.align 4# Source blocksrc:.long 0x00a.long 0x0b0.long 0xc00# Destination blockdest:.long 0x111.long 0x222.long 0x3335 Part BYou will be working in directory sim/seq in this part.Your task in Part B is to extend the SEQ processor to support two new instructions: iaddl (describedin Homework problems 4.47 and 4.49)1. leave (described in Homework problems 4.48 and 4.50)2. Toadd these instructions, you will modify the file seq-full.hcl, which implements the version of SEQdescribed in the CS:APP2e textbook. In addition, it contains declarations of some constants that you willneed for your solution.Your HCL file must begin with a header comment containing the following information:• Your name and ID.• A description of the computations required for the iaddl instruction. Use the descriptions ofirmovl and OPl in Figure 4.18 in the CS:APP2e text as a guide.1In the international edition, iaddl is described in problems 4.48 and 4.502In the international edition, leave is described in problems 4.47 and 4.494• A description of the computations required for the leave instruction. Use the description of poplin Figure 4.20 in the CS:APP2e text as a guide.Building and Testing Your SolutionOnce you have finished modifying the seq-full.hcl file, then you will need to build a new instance ofthe SEQ simulator (ssim) based on this HCL file, and then test it:• Building a new simulator. You can use make to build a new SEQ simulator:unix&gt; make VERSION=fullThis builds a version of ssim that uses the control logic you specified in seq-full.hcl. To savetyping, you can assign VERSION=full in the Makefile.• Testing your solution on a simple Y86 program. For your initial testing, we recommend runningsimple programs such as asumi.yo (testing iaddl) and asuml.yo (testing leave) in TTYmode, comparing the results against the ISA simulation:unix&gt; ./ssim -t ../y86-code/asumi.younix&gt; ./ssim -t ../y86-code/asuml.yoIf the ISA test fails, then you should debug your implementation by single stepping the simulator inGUI mode:unix&gt; ./ssim -g ../y86-code/asumi.younix&gt; ./ssim -g ../y86-code/asuml.yo• Retesting your solution using the benchmark programs. Once your simulator is able to correctlyexecute small programs, then you can automatically test it on the Y86 benchmark programs in../y86-code:unix&gt; (cd ../y86-code; make testssim)This will run ssim on the benchmark programs and check for correctness by comparing the resultingprocessor state with the state from a high-level ISA simulation. Note that none of these programs testthe added instructions. You are simply making sure that your solution did not inject errors for theoriginal instructions. See file ../y86-code/README file for more details.• Performing regression tests. Once you can execute the benchmark programs correctly, then youshould run the extensive set of regression tests in ../ptest. To test everything except iaddland leave:unix&gt; (cd ../ptest; make SIM=../seq/ssim)To test your implementation of iaddl:51 /*2 * ncopy – copy src to dst, returning number of positive ints3 * contained in src array.4 */5 int ncopy(int *src, int *dst, int len)6 {7 int count = 0;8 int val;910 while (len &gt; 0) {11 val = *src++;12 *dst++ = val;13 if (val &gt; 0)14 count++;15 len–;16 }17 return count;18 }Figure 2: C version of the ncopy function. See sim/pipe/ncopy.c.unix&gt; (cd ../ptest; make SIM=../seq/ssim TFLAGS=-i)To test your implementation of leave:unix&gt; (cd ../ptest; make SIM=../seq/ssim TFLAGS=-l)To test both iaddl and leave:unix&gt; (cd ../ptest; make SIM=../seq/ssim TFLAGS=-il)For more information on the SEQ simulator refer to the handout CS:APP2e Guide to Y86 Processor Simulators(simguide.pdf).6 Part CYou will be working in directory sim/pipe in this part.The ncopy function in Figure 2 copies a len-element integer array src to a non-overlapping dst, returninga count of the number of positive integers contained in src. Figure 3 shows the baseline Y86 versionof ncopy. The file pipe-full.hcl contains a copy of the HCL code for PIPE, along with a declarationof the constant value IIADDL.Your task in Part C is to modify ncopy.ys and pipe-full.hcl with the goal of making ncopy.ysrun as fast as possible.You will be handing in two files: pipe-full.hcl and ncopy.ys. Each file should begin with a headercomment with the following information:61 ##################################################################2 # ncopy.ys – Copy a src block of len ints to dst.3 # Return the number of positive ints (&gt;0) contained in src.4 #5 # Include your name and ID here.6 #7 # Describe how and why you modified the baseline code.8 #9 ##################################################################10 # Do not modify this portion11 # Function prologue.12 ncopy: pushl %ebp # Save old frame pointer13 rrmovl %esp,%ebp # Set up new frame pointer14 pushl %esi # Save callee-save regs15 pushl %ebx16 pushl %edi17 mrmovl 8(%ebp),%ebx # src18 mrmovl 16(%ebp),%edx # len19 mrmovl 12(%ebp),%ecx # dst2021 ##################################################################22 # You can modify this portion23 # Loop header24 xorl %eax,%eax # count = 0;25 andl %edx,%edx # len &lt;= 0?26 jle Done # if so, goto Done:2728 Loop: mrmovl (%ebx), %esi # read val from src…29 rmmovl %esi, (%ecx) # …and store it to dst30 andl %esi, %esi # val &lt;= 0?31 jle Npos # if so, goto Npos:32 irmovl $1, %edi33 addl %edi, %eax # count++34 Npos: irmovl $1, %edi35 subl %edi, %edx # len–36 irmovl $4, %edi37 addl %edi, %ebx # src++38 addl %edi, %ecx # dst++39 andl %edx,%edx # len &gt; 0?40 jg Loop # if so, goto Loop:41 ##################################################################42 # Do not modify the following section of code43 # Function epilogue.44 Done:45 popl %edi # Restore callee-save registers46 popl %ebx47 popl %esi48 rrmovl %ebp, %esp49 popl %ebp50 ret51 ##################################################################52 # Keep the following label at the end of your function53 End:Figure 3: Baseline Y86 version of the ncopy function. See sim/pipe/ncopy.ys.7• Your name and ID.• A high-level description of your code. In each case, describe how and why you modified your code.Coding RulesYou are free to make any modifications you wish, with the following constraints:• Your ncopy.ys function must work for arbitrary array sizes. You might be tempted to hardwireyour solution for 64-element arrays by simply coding 64 copy instructions, but this would be a badidea because we will be grading your solution based on its performance on arbitrary arrays.• Your ncopy.ys function must run correctly with YIS. By correctly, we mean that it must correctlycopy the src block and return (in %eax) the correct number of positive integers.• The assembled version of your ncopy file must not be more than 1000 bytes long. You can check thelength of any program with the ncopy function embedded using the provided script check-len.pl:unix&gt; ./check-len.pl &lt; ncopy.yo• Your pipe-full.hclimplementation must pass the regression tests in ../y86-codeand ../ptest(without the -il flags that test iaddl and leave).Other than that, you are free to implement the iaddl instruction if you think that will help. You maymake any semantics preserving transformations to the ncopy.ys function, such as reordering instructions,replacing groups of instructions with single instructions, deleting some instructions, and adding otherinstructions. You may find it useful to read about loop unrolling in Section 5.8 of CS:APP2e.Building and Running Your SolutionIn order to test your solution, you will need to build a driver program that calls your ncopy function. Wehave provided you with the gen-driver.pl program that generates a driver program for arbitrary sizedinput arrays. For example, typingunix&gt; make driverswill construct the following two useful driver programs:• sdriver.yo: A small driver program that tests an ncopy function on small arrays with 4 elements.If your solution is correct, then this program will halt with a value of 2 in register %eax after copyingthe src array.• ldriver.yo: A large driver program that tests an ncopy function on larger arrays with 63 elements.If your solution is correct, then this program will halt with a value of 31 (0x1f) in register%eax after copying the src array.8Each time you modify your ncopy.ys program, you can rebuild the driver programs by typingunix&gt; make driversEach time you modify your pipe-full.hcl file, you can rebuild the simulator by typingunix&gt; make psim VERSION=fullIf you want to rebuild the simulator and the driver programs, typeunix&gt; make VERSION=fullTo test your solution in GUI mode on a small 4-element array, typeunix&gt; ./psim -g sdriver.yoTo test your solution on a larger 63-element array, typeunix&gt; ./psim -g ldriver.yoOnce your simulator correctly runs your version of ncopy.ys on these two block lengths, you will wantto perform the following additional tests:• Testing your driver files on the ISA simulator. Make sure that your ncopy.ys function works properlywith YIS:unix&gt; make driversunix&gt; ../misc/yis sdriver.yo• Testing your code on a range of block lengths with the ISA simulator. The Perl script correctness.plgenerates driver files with block lengths from 0 up to some limit (default 65), plus some larger sizes.It simulates them (by default with YIS), and checks the results. It generates a report showing the statusfor each block length:unix&gt; ./correctness.plThis script generates test programs where the result count varies randomly from one run to another,and so it provides a more stringent test than the standard drivers.If you get incorrect results for some length K, you can generate a driver file for that length thatincludes checking code, and where the result varies randomly:unix&gt; ./gen-driver.pl -f ncopy.ys -n K -rc &gt; driver.ysunix&gt; make driver.younix&gt; ../misc/yis driver.yoThe program will end with register %eax having the following value:0xaaaa : All tests pass.90xbbbb : Incorrect count0xcccc : Function ncopy is more than 1000 bytes long.0xdddd : Some of the source data was not copied to its destination.0xeeee : Some word just before or just after the destination region was corrupted.• Testing your pipeline simulator on the benchmark programs. Once your simulator is able to correctlyexecute sdriver.ys and ldriver.ys, you should test it against the Y86 benchmark programsin ../y86-code:unix&gt; (cd ../y86-code; make testpsim)This will run psim on the benchmark programs and compare results with YIS.• Testing your pipeline simulator with extensive regression tests. Once you can execute the benchmarkprograms correctly, then you should check it with the regression tests in ../ptest. For example, ifyour solution implements the iaddl instruction, thenunix&gt; (cd ../ptest; make SIM=../pipe/psim TFLAGS=-i)• Testing your code on a range of block lengths with the pipeline simulator. Finally, you can run thesame code tests on the pipeline simulator that you did earlier with the ISA simulatorunix&gt; ./correctness.pl -p7 EvaluationThe lab is worth 190 points: 30 points for Part A, 60 points for Part B, and 100 points for Part C.Part APart A is worth 30 points, 10 points for each Y86 solution program. Each solution program will be evaluatedfor correctness, including proper handling of the stack and registers, as well as functional equivalence withthe example C functions in examples.c.The programs sum.ys and rsum.ys will be considered correct if the graders do not spot any errors inthem, and their respective sum list and rsum list functions return the sum 0xcba in register %eax.The program copy.ys will be considered correct if the graders do not spot any errors in them, and thecopy block function returns the sum 0xcba in register %eax, copies the three words 0x00a, 0x0b,and 0xc to the 12 contiguous memory locations beginning at address dest, and does not corrupt othermemory locations.10Part BThis part of the lab is worth 60 points:• 10 points for your description of the computations required for the iaddl instruction.• 10 points for your description of the computations required for the leave instruction.• 10 points for passing the benchmark regression tests in y86-code, to verify that your simulator stillcorrectly executes the benchmark suite.• 15 points for passing the regression tests in ptest for iaddl.• 15 points for passing the regression tests in ptest for leave.Part CThis part of the Lab is worth 100 points: You will not receive any credit if either your code for ncopy.ysor your modified simulator fails any of the tests described earlier.• 20 points each for your descriptions in the headers of ncopy.ys and pipe-full.hcl and thequality of these implementations.• 60 points for performance. To receive credit here, your solution must be correct, as defined earlier.That is, ncopy runs correctly with YIS, and pipe-full.hcl passes all tests in y86-code andptest.We will express the performance of your function in units of cycles per element (CPE). That is, if thesimulated code requires C cycles to copy a block of N elements, then the CPE is C/N. The PIPEsimulator displays the total number of cycles required to complete the program. The baseline versionof the ncopy function running on the standard PIPE simulator with a large 63-element array requires914 cycles to copy 63 elements, for a CPE of 914/63 = 14.51.Since some cycles are used to set up the call to ncopy and to set up the loop within ncopy, youwill find that you will get different values of the CPE for different block lengths (generally the CPEwill drop as N increases). We will therefore evaluate the performance of your function by computingthe average of the CPEs for blocks ranging from 1 to 64 elements. You can use the Perl scriptbenchmark.pl in the pipe directory to run simulations of your ncopy.ys code over a range ofblock lengths and compute the average CPE. Simply run the commandunix&gt; ./benchmark.plto see what happens. For example, the baseline version of the ncopy function has CPE values rangingbetween 46.0 and 14.51, with an average of 16.44. Note that this Perl script does not check for thecorrectness of the answer. Use the script correctness.pl for this:unix&gt; ./benchmark.pl -p11You should be able to achieve an average CPE of less than 10.0. Our best version averages 9.27. Ifyour average CPE is c, then your score S for this portion of the lab will be:S =8&gt;&lt;&gt;:0 , c &gt; 12.524.0 · (12.5 − c) , 10.0 &#x14; c &#x14; 12.560 , c &lt; 10.0By default, benchmark.pl and correctness.pl compile and test ncopy.ys. Use the -fargument to specify a different file name. The -h flag gives a complete list of the command linearguments.8 Handin InstructionsSITE-SPECIFIC: Insert a description that explains how students should hand in the threeparts of the lab. Here is the description we use at CMU.• You will be handing in three sets of files:– Part A: sum.ys, rsum.ys, and copy.ys.– Part B: seq-full.hcl.– Part C: ncopy.ys and pipe-full.hcl.• Make sure you have included your name and ID in a comment at the top of each of your handin files.• To handin your files for part X, go to your archlab-handout directory and type:unix&gt; make handin-partX TEAM=teamnamewhere X is a, b, or c, and where teamname is your ID. For example, to handin Part A:unix&gt; make handin-parta TEAM=teamname• After the handin, if you discover a mistake and want to submit a revised copy, typeunix make handin-partX TEAM=teamname VERSION=2Keep incrementing the version number with each submission.• You can verify your handin by looking inCLASSDIR/archlab/handin-partXYou have list and insert permissions in this directory, but no read or write permissions.129 Hints• By design, both sdriver.yo and ldriver.yo are small enough to debug with in GUI mode. Wefind it easiest to debug in GUI mode, and suggest that you use it.• If you running in GUI mode on a Unix server, make sure that you have initialized the DISPLAYenvironment variable:unix&gt; setenv DISPLAY myhost.edu:0• With some X servers, the “Program Code” window begins life as a closed icon when you run psimor ssim in GUI mode. Simply click on the icon to expand the window.• With some Microsoft Windows-based X servers, the “Memory Contents” window will not automaticallyresize itself. You’ll need to resize the window by hand.• The psim and ssim simulators terminate with a segmentation fault if you ask them to execute a filethat is not a valid Y86 object file.13